.Au John Kaul
.Dd April 28 2026
.Dt sysconf.7
.Os
.Pp
.Sh NAME 
.Nm sysconf 
.Nd A dependency free key/value configuration file editing tool.
.Pp
.Sh SYNOPSIS 
.Nm
-f configfile
.Nm
-f configfile [-d configfile.defaults]
.Nm
-f configfile [-n] [key]
.Nm
-f configfile [key=value]
.Nm
-f configfile [key+=value]
.Nm
-f configfile [key-=value]
.Pp
.Sh OPTIONS 
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl f Ar configfile
Configuration file
.Pp
.It Fl d Ar configfile.defaults
Check the 
.Li configfile
's key values against 
.Li configfile.defaults
's key
values for duplicate entries.
.Pp
.It Fl n
Display "key" as well when retrieving a variable. The default method
is to only display a key's value but this option makes the return show
both the key and the value.
.Pp
.It key
Displays the values associated with given key.
.Pp
.It key=value
This option adds a new or overwrites an existing key/value entry.
.Pp
.It key+=value
This option add to an existing key/value entry.
.Pp
.It key-=value
This option deletes an existing key's value entry. If the last value
is called to be removed the entire key/value is removed from the file.
.El
.Pp
.Sh DESCRIPTION 
This utility will 'get' (-i.e., print to stdout) and/or 'set' (i.e.,
change) a key/value value stored in a configuration file formatted in
the typical key/value syntax with zero dependencies on external
libraries or tools. There are several popular key/value styles
different programs and tools can use so this utility was designed to
tokenize several.
.Pp
By design 
.Nm
does not have any flags to specify actions to preform
different actions, instead this utility will try to determine what to
do, or not to do, based on the arguments given and what is currently
in the config file. See the examples below. During a 'set' operation,
.Nm
will also try to determine the syntax of the key/value
pair, to be changed, by reading the key/value string (-e.g. based on
the key/value being changed, sysconf will try to determine if the
value needs quotes or a termination character and either spaces or an
equal sign or colon separation character).
.Pp
This utility can also add and delete values to a key with 
.Cm +=
and 
.Cm -=.
.Pp
Example configuration file syntaxes this utility can 'get' and 'set'.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
    key=value
    key = value;
    key.subkey = value;
    key="value"
    key value
    key value;
    key:"value"
    key = "value1 value2";
    etc.
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy NOTE
:
Some keys or values in configuration files can contain special
characters like dollar signs ($). To pass these characters to this
utility, the dollar sign must be escaped with a slash (\\) or the
string can be surrounded with single quotes (').
.Pp
If the configuration file does not already contain the key/value entry
when a call to 'set' is made, this utility will add the new entry, at
the bottom of the file, in the following format (which is also the
default syntax for rc.conf key/values). If the configuration file does
not exist, 
.Nm
will create the file and add the key/value entry.
.Pp
.Bd -literal -offset indent
key="value"
.Ed
.Pp
This utility does not allow/account for duplicate key/value entries in
the 'get' and 'set' stages. The files first key/value entry found
durring a 'get' is returned and the files first key/value entry is
written to the 'set' stage (the second--duplicate--key/value is not
written).
.Pp
It is also possible to check a configuration file's key/values against
a default configuration file which will search for duplicate values in
keys listed in the configuration file. For example, in FreeBSD the
/etc/rc.conf file is included from the file /etc/defaults/rc.conf,
which specifies the default settings for all the available options.
Options need only be specified in /etc/rc.conf when the system
administrator wishes to override these defaults. See the example
section below for 'checking for duplicates'.
.Pp
.Pp
.Sh EXAMPLES 
.Pp
.Em LIST ALL VALUE(S)
.Pp
To list off (pretty print) the key/values in a config file just call
the program with no arguments. However, the way this program parses
the key/value strings may result in slightly odd looking results so
you should not try to use this utility to remove duplicate key/values.
.Pp
.Bd -literal -offset indent
    % sysconf -f /path/config.file
.Ed
.Pp
.Em GET A VALUE
.Pp
To retrieve the value from a key in a file call this program with just
the key to search for. This utility will only return the value(s) for
the given key to better support usage from within a script.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
    % sysconf -f /path/config.file key
    % value
.Ed
.Pp
If there is a need to produce the key as well as the value in the
output of a 'get a value' operation, the 
.Li -n
switch can be used.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
    % sysconf -f /path/config.file -n key
    % key: value
.Ed
.Pp
.Em CHANGE VALUE(S)
.Pp
To change a value associated with a key use the equal ( 
.Cm =
) sign. A
change will only be made if the value does not match what is currently
in the config file -i.e., if the value to be assigned is already the
same as it is in the config file, no change is made.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
    % sysconf -f /path/config.file key=value
.Ed
.Pp
To add to a value associated with a key use a plus-equal ( 
.Cm +=
). A
change will only be added if the value does not already exist in the
config value string -i.e., if the value to be assigned is already part
of the config file value, no change is made.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
    % sysconf -f /path/config.file key+=value
.Ed
.Pp
To remove a value associated with a key use a minus-equal ( 
.Cm -=
). A
change will only be made if the value exists in the config file value
string. And when the last value for the given key is called out to be
removed the key will also be removed from the file.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
    % sysconf -f /path/config.file key-=value
.Ed
.Pp
.Em ESCAPING CHARS
.Pp
To use a dollar sign in a key, escape it.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
    % sysconf -f /path/config.file \\$key
.Ed
.Pp
or use single quotes to surround the string.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
    % sysconf -f /path/config.file '$key'
.Ed
.Pp
.Em CHECKING FOR DUPLICATES
.Pp
To search for duplicate values in a configuration file against a
default configuration file key values, use the -f and -d flags.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
    % sysconf -f /path/config.file -d /path/config.file.defaults
.Ed
.Pp
.Sh EXIT 
The 
.Nm
utility exits 0 on success, and >0 if an error occurs.
.Pp
.Sh HISTORY 
Created for my personal use.
.Pp
.Sh AUTHOR 
John Kaul
